
Linear Elasticity in 2D for 3 Phases
====================================

Introduction
------------

This example provides a demonstration of using PyMKS to compute the
linear strain field for a three-phase composite material. It
demonstrates how to generate data for delta microstructures and then use
this data to calibrate the first order MKS influence coefficients. The
calibrated influence coefficients are used to predict the strain
response for a random microstructure and the results are compared with
those from finite element. Finally, the influence coefficients are
scaled up and the MKS results are again compared with the finite element
data for a large problem.

PyMKS uses the finite element tool `SfePy <http://sfepy.org>`__ to
generate both the strain fields to fit the MKS model and the
verification data to evaluate the MKS model's accuracy.

Elastostatics Equations and Boundary Conditions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The governing equations for elasticostaics and the boundary conditions
used in this example are the same as those provided in the `Linear
Elastic in 2D <elasticity_2D.html>`__ example.

Note that an inappropriate boundary condition is used in this example
because current version of SfePy is unable to implement a periodic plus
displacement boundary condition. This leads to some issues near the
edges of the domain and introduces errors into the resizing of the
coefficients. We are working to fix this issue, but note that the
problem is not with the MKS regression itself, but with the calibration
data used. The finite element package ABAQUS includes the displaced
periodic boundary condition and can be used to calibrate the MKS
regression correctly.

Modeling with MKS
-----------------

Calibration Data and Delta Microstructures
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first order MKS influence coefficients are all that is needed to
compute a strain field of a random microstructure as long as the ratio
between the elastic moduli (also known as the contrast) is less than
1.5. If this condition is met we can expect a mean absolute error of 2%
or less when comparing the MKS results with those computed using finite
element methods [1].

Because we are using distinct phases and the contrast is low enough to
only need the first-order coefficients, delta microstructures and their
strain fields are all that we need to calibrate the first-order
influence coefficients [2].

Here we use the ``make_delta_microstructure`` function from
``pymks.datasets`` to create the delta microstructures needed to
calibrate the first-order influence coefficients for a two-phase
microstructure. The ``make_delta_microstructure`` function uses SfePy to
generate the data.

.. code:: python

    import pymks
    
    %matplotlib inline
    %load_ext autoreload
    %autoreload 2
    
    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt


.. code:: python

    from pymks.tools import draw_microstructures
    from pymks.datasets import make_delta_microstructures
    
    
    n = 21
    n_phases = 3
    X_delta = make_delta_microstructures(n_phases=n_phases, size=(n, n))


Let's take a look at a few of the delta microstructures by importing
``draw_microstructures`` from ``pymks.tools``.

.. code:: python

    draw_microstructures(X_delta[::2])




.. image:: localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_files/localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_6_0.png


Using delta microstructures for the calibration of the first-order
influence coefficients is essentially the same, as using a unit `impulse
response <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impulse_response>`__ to find the
kernel of a system in signal processing. Any given delta microstructure
is composed of only two phases with the center cell having an
alternative phase from the remainder of the domain. The number of delta
microstructures that are needed to calibrated the first-order
coefficients is :math:`N(N-1)` where :math:`N` is the number of phases,
therefore in this example we need 6 delta microstructures.

Generating Calibration Data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``make_elasticFEstrain_delta`` function from ``pymks.datasets``
provides an easy interface to generate delta microstructures and their
strain fields, which can then be used for calibration of the influence
coefficients. The function calls the ``ElasticFESimulation`` class to
compute the strain fields.

In this example, lets look at a three phase microstructure with elastic
moduli values of 80, 100 and 120 and Poisson's ratio values all equal to
0.3. Let's also set the macroscopic imposed strain equal to 0.02. All of
these parameters used in the simulation must be passed into the
``make_elasticFEstrain_delta`` function. The number of Poisson's ratio
values and elastic moduli values indicates the number of phases. Note
that ``make_elasticFEstrain_delta`` does not take a number of samples
argument as the number of samples to calibrate the MKS is fixed by the
number of phases.

.. code:: python

    from pymks.datasets import make_elastic_FE_strain_delta
    from pymks.tools import draw_microstructure_strain
    
    
    elastic_modulus = (80, 100, 120)
    poissons_ratio = (0.3, 0.3, 0.3)
    macro_strain = 0.02
    size = (n, n)
    
    X_delta, strains_delta = make_elastic_FE_strain_delta(elastic_modulus=elastic_modulus,
                                                          poissons_ratio=poissons_ratio,
                                                          size=size, macro_strain=macro_strain)


Let's take a look at one of the delta microstructures and the
:math:`\varepsilon_{xx}` strain field.

.. code:: python

    draw_microstructure_strain(X_delta[0], strains_delta[0])




.. image:: localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_files/localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_11_0.png


Because ``slice(None)`` (the default slice operator in Python,
equivalent to array[:]) was passed in to the
``make_elasticFEstrain_delta`` function as the argument for
``strain_index``, the function returns all the strain fields. Let's also
take a look at the :math:`\varepsilon_{yy}` and :math:`\varepsilon_{xy}`
strain fields.

Calibrating First-Order Influence Coefficients
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now that we have the delta microstructures and their strain fields, we
will calibrate the influence coefficients by creating an instance of the
``MKSLocalizatoinModel`` class. Because we are going to calibrate the
influence coefficients with delta microstructures, we can create an
instance of ``PrimitiveBasis`` with ``n_states`` equal to 3, and use it
to create an instance of ``MKSLocalizationModel``. The delta
microstructures and their strain fields will then be passed to the
``fit`` method.

.. code:: python

    from pymks import MKSLocalizationModel
    from pymks import PrimitiveBasis
    
    
    p_basis =PrimitiveBasis(n_states=3, domain=[0, 2])
    model = MKSLocalizationModel(basis=p_basis)


Now, pass the delta microstructures and their strain fields into the
``fit`` method to calibrate the first-order influence coefficients.

.. code:: python

    model.fit(X_delta, strains_delta)


That's it, the influence coefficient have been calibrated. Let's take a
look at them.

.. code:: python

    from pymks.tools import draw_coeff
    
    
    draw_coeff(model.coef_)




.. image:: localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_files/localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_18_0.png


The influence coefficients for :math:`l=0` and :math:`l = 1` have a
Gaussian-like shape, while the influence coefficients for :math:`l=2`
are constant-valued. The constant-valued influence coefficients may seem
superfluous, but are equally as important. They are equivalent to the
constant term in multiple linear regression with `categorical
variables <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dummy_variable_%28statistics%29>`__.

Predict of the Strain Field for a Random Microstructure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let's now use our instance of the ``MKSLocalizationModel`` class with
calibrated influence coefficients to compute the strain field for a
random two-phase microstructure and compare it with the results from a
finite element simulation.

The ``make_elasticFEstrain_random`` function from ``pymks.datasets`` is
an easy way to generate a random microstructure and its strain field
results from finite element analysis.

.. code:: python

    from pymks.datasets import make_elastic_FE_strain_random
    
    
    np.random.seed(101)
    X, strain = make_elastic_FE_strain_random(n_samples=1, elastic_modulus=elastic_modulus,
                                              poissons_ratio=poissons_ratio, size=size, 
                                              macro_strain=macro_strain)
    draw_microstructure_strain(X[0] , strain[0])




.. image:: localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_files/localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_21_0.png


**Note that the calibrated influence coefficients can only be used to
reproduce the simulation with the same boundary conditions that they
were calibrated with.**

Now, to get the strain field from the ``MKSLocalizationModel``, just
pass the same microstructure to the ``predict`` method.

.. code:: python

    strain_pred = model.predict(X)


Finally let's compare the results from finite element simulation and the
MKS model.

.. code:: python

    from pymks.tools import draw_strains_compare
    
    
    draw_strains_compare(strain[0], strain_pred[0])




.. image:: localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_files/localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_25_0.png


Let's plot the difference between the two strain fields.

.. code:: python

    from pymks.tools import draw_differences
    
    
    draw_differences([strain[0] - strain_pred[0]], ['Finite Element - MKS'])




.. image:: localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_files/localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_27_0.png


The MKS model is able to capture the strain field for the random
microstructure after being calibrated with delta microstructures.

Resizing the Coefficeints to use on Larger Microstructures
----------------------------------------------------------

The influence coefficients that were calibrated on a smaller
microstructure can be used to predict the strain field on a larger
microstructure though spectral interpolation [3], but accuracy of the
MKS model drops slightly. To demonstrate how this is done, let's
generate a new larger random microstructure and its strain field.

.. code:: python

    m = 3 * n 
    size = (m, m)
    print size
    X, strain = make_elastic_FE_strain_random(n_samples=1, elastic_modulus=elastic_modulus,
                                              poissons_ratio=poissons_ratio, size=size, 
                                              macro_strain=macro_strain)
    draw_microstructure_strain(X[0] , strain[0])



.. parsed-literal::

    (63, 63)



.. image:: localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_files/localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_30_1.png


The influence coefficients that have already been calibrated on a
:math:`n` by :math:`n` delta microstructures, need to be resized to
match the shape of the new larger :math:`m` by :math:`m` microstructure
that we want to compute the strain field for. This can be done by
passing the shape of the new larger microstructure into the
``resize_coeff`` method.

.. code:: python

    model.resize_coeff(X[0].shape)


Let's now take a look that ther resized influence coefficients.

.. code:: python

    draw_coeff(model.coef_)




.. image:: localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_files/localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_34_0.png


Because the coefficients have been resized, they will no longer work for
our original :math:`n` by :math:`n` sized microstructures they were
calibrated on, but they can now be used on the :math:`m` by :math:`m`
microstructures. Just like before, just pass the microstructure as the
argument of the ``predict`` method to get the strain field.

.. code:: python

    strain_pred = model.predict(X)
    
    draw_strains_compare(strain[0], strain_pred[0])




.. image:: localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_files/localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_36_0.png


Again, let's plot the difference between the two strain fields.

.. code:: python

    draw_differences([strain[0] - strain_pred[0]], ['Finite Element - MKS'])




.. image:: localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_files/localization_elasticity_multiphase_2D_38_0.png


As you can see, the results from the strain field computed with the
resized influence coefficients is not as accurate as they were before
they were resized. This decrease in accuracy is expected when using
spectral interpolation [4].

References
----------

[1] Binci M., Fullwood D., Kalidindi S.R., A new spectral framework for
establishing localization relationships for elastic behavior of
composites and their calibration to finite-element models. Acta
Materialia, 2008. 56 (10) p. 2272-2282
`doi:10.1016/j.actamat.2008.01.017 <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2008.01.017>`__.

[2] Landi, G., S.R. Niezgoda, S.R. Kalidindi, Multi-scale modeling of
elastic response of three-dimensional voxel-based microstructure
datasets using novel DFT-based knowledge systems. Acta Materialia, 2009.
58 (7): p. 2716-2725
`doi:10.1016/j.actamat.2010.01.007 <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2010.01.007>`__.

[3] Marko, K., Kalidindi S.R., Fullwood D., Computationally efficient
database and spectral interpolation for fully plastic Taylor-type
crystal plasticity calculations of face-centered cubic polycrystals.
International Journal of Plasticity 24 (2008) 1264–1276
`doi:10.1016/j.ijplas.2007.12.002 <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2007.12.002>`__.

[4] Marko, K. Al-Harbi H. F. , Kalidindi S.R., Crystal plasticity
simulations using discrete Fourier transforms. Acta Materialia 57 (2009)
1777–1784
`doi:10.1016/j.actamat.2008.12.017 <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2008.12.017>`__.

