
Technical Overview
==================

This page provides very high level technical information about
microstructure discretization, 2-point statistics, MKS Localization and
MKS Homogenization. For more detailed information, see the `MINED
research group's website <http://mined.gatech.edu/>`__.

Microstructure Discretization
-----------------------------

The first step in all of MKS workflows is to discretize microstructures.
To do this, we create a probabilistic description of a microstructure by
introducing the continuous local state variable :math:`h`, the local
state space :math:`H` and the microstructure function :math:`m(h, x)`.
The local state space :math:`H` can be thought of as all of the
thermodynamic state variables that are needed to uniquely define the
material structure at a given location. The local state variable
:math:`h` is one instance of the local state space, or one configuration
of state variables. The microstructure function :math:`m(h, x)` is a
probability density function of finding a a local state :math:`h` at
location :math:`x`. For instance, let :math:`\mu(x)` be a microstructure
that we plan to discretize, then :math:`\mu` is the expectation of the
microstructure function.

.. math::  \mu(x) = \int_H h m(h, x) dh 

Now, we will discretize the microstructure in space by averaging over
small cubic domains in the microstructure function. The local state can
be discretized, using two methods: one is to bin the microstructure,
using the primitive basis :math:`\Lambda`

.. math::   \frac{1}{\Delta x} \int_{H} \int_{s} \Lambda(h - l) m(h, x) dx dh = m[l, s] 

the other is to use a spectral representation using some orthogonal
basis function :math:`\xi`

.. math::  \frac{1}{\Delta x}  \int_{s} m(h, x) dx dt = \sum_{l=0}^{L-1} m[l, s] \xi_l (h) 

In the notation above, all of the round brackets variables are
continuous variables and the square brackets variables are the discrete
variables. The variables :math:`s` and :math:`S` represent a discrete
position and the total volume, while :math:`l` and :math:`L` represent
the discrete versions of :math:`h` and :math:`H`. In PyMKS the Legendre
polynomials are currently the only orthgonal basis functions available.

Either of these two discretization methods are used to discretize the
microstructure.

2-Point Statistics
------------------

n-Point Spatial Correlations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1-Point Spatial Correlations (or 1-point statistics)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

N-point spatial correlations provide a way to rigorously quantify
material structure, using statistics. As an introduction to n-point
spatial correlations, let's first discuss 1-point statistics. 1-point
statistics are the probability that a specified local state will be
found in any randomly selected spatial bin in a microstructure
[1][2][3]. 1-point statistics compute the volume fractions of the local
states in the microstructure. 1-point statistics are computed as

.. math::  f[l] = \frac{1}{S} \sum_s m[s,l] 

In this equation, :math:`f[l]` is the probability of finding the local
state :math:`l` in any randomly selected spatial bin in the
microstructure, :math:`m[s, l]` is the microstructure function (the
digital representation of the microstructure), :math:`S` is the total
number of spatial bins in the microstructure and :math:`s` refers to a
specific spatial bin.

While 1-point statistics provide information on the relative amounts of
the different local states, they do not provide any information about
how those local states are spatially arranged in the microstructure.
Therefore, 1-point statistics are a limited set of metrics to describe
the structure of materials.

2-Point Spatial Correlations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

2-point spatial correlations (also known as 2-point statistics) contain
information about the fractions of local states as well as the first
order information on how the different local states are distributed in
the microstructure.

2-point statistics can be thought of as the probability of having a
vector placed randomly in the microstructure and having one end of the
vector be on one specified local state and the other end on another
specified local state. This vector could have any length or orientation
that the discrete microstructure allows. The equation for 2-point
statistics can be found below.

.. math::  f[r \vert l, l'] = \frac{1}{S} \sum_s m[s, l] m[s + r, l'] 

In this equation :math:`f[r \vert l, l']` is the conditional probability
of finding the local states :math:`l` and :math:`l'` at a distance and
orientation away from each other defined by the vector :math:`r`. All
other variables are the same as those in the 1-point statistics
equation. In the case that we have an eigen microstructure function (it
only contains values of 0 or 1) and we are using an indicator basis, the
the :math:`r=0` vector will recover the 1-point statistics.

When the 2 local states are the same :math:`l = l'`, it is referred to
as a *autocorrelation*. If the 2 local states are not the same, it is
referred to as a *cross-correlation*.

Higher Order Spatial Statistics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Higher order spatial statistics are similar to 2-point statistics, in
that they can be thought of in terms of conditional probabilities of
finding specified local states separated by a prescribed set of vectors.
3-point statistics are the probability of finding three specified local
states at the ends of a triangle (defined by 2 vectors), placed randomly
in the material structure. 4-point statistics describes the probability
of finding 4 local states at 4 locations (defined, using 3 vectors) and
so on.

While higher order statistics are a better metric to quantify the
material structure, the 2-point statistics can be computed much faster
than higher order spatial statistics, and still provide information
about how the local states are distributed. For this reason, currently
only 2-point statistics are implemented in PyMKS.

MKS Homogenization
------------------

*Homogenization* can be used to determine effective or homogenized
properties a material, and provides a way to multiscale from the bottom
up. Below is some technical information on the MKS Homogenization
workflow.

2-Point Statistics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first step in MKS homogenization is to compute the 2-point
statistics for each of the microstructures in the calibration dataset.
For more information about 2-point statistics, see the section above.

Dimensionality Reduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once we have computed the 2-point statistics for every microstructure in
our calibration dataset, we need to determine which of these
microstructure features are most important and need to be pass to the
higher length scale. We can do this, using dimensionality reduction
techniques from machine learning.

`PCA <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principal_component_analysis>`__ is
the most common dimensionality reduction technique used in the MKS
Homogenization workflow. PCA provides an efficient way to find a small
number of microstructure descriptors that capture most of the variance
in microstructures.

Regression Model
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once we have the low dimensional microstructure descriptors, we can use
regression methods to map an effective property into the low dimensional
space.

Multivariate `Polynomial
Regression <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polynomial_regression>`__ has
been the most common regression technique, used to connect the low
dimensional microstructure descriptors to an effective property.

An effective property for a new microstructure is predicted by
translating into the microstructure into the low dimensional space and
using the regression technique.

MKS Localization
----------------

*Localization* can be used to determine how an applied boundary
condition is locally distributed within a microstructure, and provides
method to multiscale from the top down. Below is some technical
information on the MKS Localization workflow.

Influence Coefficients
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once the state space is discretized, the relationship between the
response field :math:`p` and microstructure function :math:`m` can be
written as

.. math::  p\left[s\right] = \sum_{r=0}^{S-1} \sum_{l=0}^{L-1} \alpha\left[l, r\right] m \left[l, s - r\right] + ...

where :math:`\alpha` are known as the influence coefficients and
describe the relationship between :math:`p` and :math:`m`. The
localization requires periodic boundary conditions.

Convolution and FFTs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first-order influence coefficients in the MKS Localization equation
can be efficiently found, using DFTs and linear regression. The time
complexity of the convolution in real space is :math:`O(LMN^2)`, while
the same results found, using FFTs, is :math:`O(LMNlogN)`, where
:math:`L` is the number of local states and :math:`M` is the number of
samples.

The convolution

.. math:: \sum_{r=0}^{S-1} \sum_{l=0}^{L-1} \alpha[l, r] m[l, s - r] 

can be deconvolved in Fourier space, using the `circular convolution
theorem <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discrete_Fourier_transform#Circular_convolution_theorem_and_cross-correlation_theorem>`__.

If we write
:math:`P \left[k \right] =  \mathcal{F}_k \{ p\left[s\right] \}`,
:math:`M\left[l, k\right]= \mathcal{F}_k  \{ m\left[l, s\right] \}` and
:math:`\beta\left[l, k\right] = \mathcal{F}_k \{  \alpha \left[l, s\right] \}`,
then we just need to solve

.. math::  P\left[k\right] = \sum_{l=0}^{L-1} \beta \left[l, k\right] M \left[l, k\right] 

with a linear regression at each discretization location in :math:`k` to
find the :math:`\beta` terms.

More Information about MKS
--------------------------

More information about MKS workflows can be found on `MINED research
group's webite <http://mined.gatech.edu>`__

